---
layout: post
category: notes
title: Godot
image: /Notes/assets/images/Godot1.png
summary: Create your own games in a simple game editor
date: 2021-04-11
author: Nathan Swindall
---

"Discover Godot!

The amazing free and open source game engine you've been waiting for is a joy to use. In this course we'll take you from an absolute beginner with no experience in coding at all to someone able to make 2D and 3D games in this lovely little engine. 

As a student in this course, you'll go through a series of five projects, each bigger, more awesome and more feature rich than the last.

* Loony Lips - a simple word game that will teach you the basics of coding and of Godot

* Hoppy Days - a delightful 2D platform game starring a cute bunny

* Heist Meisters - a tense 2D top-down stealth game

* Cubedude Kickabout - a local multiplayer 3D football/soccer game

* Food fight - a third person shooter

We'll be working with GDScript, Godot's powerful python based language that will allow us to get awesome results very quickly.  You'll be provided with all the assets you need and the skills to take your games (and your future projects) even further.

Some of the things we'll cover include;

* Variables, Arrays and Dictionaries

* *ilemaps and Gridmaps

* PhysicsBody nodes

* Local multiplayer

* Using external JSON files

* Showing 2D in 3D

And much, much more!

Your instructor will be Yann, who's taught thousands of students Godot since 2017, loves making things and seeing what his students make.

And much much more!.  So pick up Discovering Godot today, and I'll see you in the course!"

### **Notes for Godot**
{% assign Chapter2 = "Notes/Chapters/Godot/HoppyDays" | relative_url %} 
<a href="{{Chapter2}}">Hoppy Days</a>

